So now that we've had a look and
we understand what a quantitative model is about let me tell you some of the specific
activities where these models are used. So one thing that we can do once we've
got a quantitative model is prediction. And prediction is
basically taking the model, putting in an input, and
calculating the output. And so going back to the diamonds ring
example, what I mean by prediction. What's the expected price of a diamond
ring that weighs 0.2 of a carats? If I got a model,
I can create that prediction. And certainly one of the most
often used places for these quantitative models is what
we call predictive analytics. And so
if you want to do predictive analytics, you need some underlying model for
the process, typically. Another place that we use these
models is in forecasting. And when I'm talking about forecasting
I'm really thinking about a time series. And I'm thinking about trying to make
a comment about what's happening in the future. And so forecasting is an activity
that most businesses and entities go through at some stage,
often to do with resource planning. And going back to the example of the
epidemic if one was involved in a public health situation, a key question that
you would be asking, for example, would be how many people are expected
to be infected in six weeks time. Because that, the answer to that sort of
question is going to help me in terms of resource planning. Here's another forecasting type problem
where quantitative models can be very, very useful. So imagine that you're running a hospital. And you are trying to schedule
patients for appointments. One of the truths of the matter here
is that not everybody shows up for their appointment. And that leads to
inefficiencies in the system. The system could be improved if we had
a sense of who was likely to not show up. And perhaps we could tweak
the schedule as a result of that. And so that would be another example where
we would like to do some forecasting, forecasting whether or not someone's
likely to show up for an appointment. Another activity that we use these
quantitative models for is optimization. And so optimization takes up
a lot of business thinking. And the example that I've got
here is the demand and price. And so
It's a very legitimate question to ask. I wonder what price is
going to maximize the profit? And the key word there is maximize,
that's to optimize an output, the profit. And optimization activities are going to typically require an underlying
quantitative model. And so that's one of the places where
quantitative models go to work as inputs for optimization, trying to make
your business as good as it can be, optimizing price,
optimizing the supply chain etc. So we use models for optimization. Another activity that we go through and
models help us are ranking and targeting. And so what I mean there is that
we're often looking at a list. It might be customers or
it might be diamonds, for example. And we'd like to have a look at these
diamonds, perhaps, and figure out which ones we'd be interested in purchasing if
we're a diamond merchant, for example. And so I can't look at all the diamonds
that are out there in the world because I simply don't have the resources. And so that's the idea of
given limited resources. It would be really nice if I could
identify potential targets of opportunity. And that essentially is a ranking and
targeting exercise. And if we have a model we can
create a set of predictions. We can sort those predictions and
that creates a ranking. And then we can work our way down that
list of predictions in order there, that rank list,
in order to optimize our own time. And so another example would be
that I'm interested in real estate. And I'm considering
potential properties to buy. There are millions of
properties potentially for sale in the country at
any one point in time. I don't have an opportunity
to look at all of them. Be nice if I could create a model
that would help me identify those properties that seem the,
are of the most interest to me. And that's something that
a model can help you do. Here are some more things that we
can use our quantitative models for. What-if scenarios, scenario planning,
we will often like to understand what might happen to
the world if certain things change. And so going back to the epidemic we might
want to ask ourselves the question well, what if the growth rate changed and
increased to 20% per week? Then how may infections are we
going to expect in the next ten weeks? So if we have a model,
we are able to examine the consequences of the change
of some of our assumptions. And that's the idea of scenario
planning and what-if analysis. So that's something else that
a model can help you do. Certain models lend
themselves to interpretation. And in terms of the price and
quantity demanded model, there was a coefficient In the equation,
if you look back. And that coefficient was the power,
which was -2.5. So it's a number, but sometimes these
coefficients have interpretations. And that interpretation can be helpful. And turns out that
the interpretation of that -2.5 is what's known as an elasticity. And it tells us that as
the price goes up by 1%, we can anticipate
the demand to fall by 2.5%. And so that's what I mean by
interpreting a coefficient in a model. And that can give us
additional insight and help us explain the model to other people. So our models involve
mathematical equations. The mathematical equations often
have coefficients in them. The coefficients can have real
meanings and interpretations. Another task that models are used for
is to conduct a sensitivity analysis. And so I pointed out earlier on that pretty much every model you create is
going to rely on some assumptions. And a sensitivity analysis
is a process where we look to see how sensitive the outputs of the
model are to some of those assumptions. And if we find that the model that's
particularly sensitive to an assumption, then that tells us that we need to
think a little more carefully about that assumption. Maybe we'll try and confirm that
the assumption is realistic or collect more information to try and
tie that assumption down more precisely. So there's a sensitivity
analysis typically with a model that helps us figure out which of
the assumptions are really important and which aren't so important, and therefore
how we might want to use our time in confirming that the underlying
assumptions are reasonable. After having gone through
this whole modeling business, hopefully there are some benefits. And here I've listed
out a set of benefits. They're undoubtedly more
than up here on this slide. But these are benefits that I think and
have experienced myself, after having gone through
this modeling activity. So one of the things that can
be the outcome of a model is the identification that there's some
gaps in the current understanding. You've tried to lay out your
understanding of the business process. And theres just some big gap
sitting there in the middle. And that's only become apparent because
you've taken the time to lay out your current understanding. So identifying gaps is
certainly a benefit. It's often the case that
people are using models without having made underlying
assumptions explicit. And so one of the benefits of
creating a useful model is that you will have explicated
what those assumptions are. So they're on the table,
everybody can see what you're assuming as you come up with your
recommendations from that model. And sometimes those assumptions
have been implicitly foreign. Not everyone is aware of them. And so explicating the assumptions
can be very useful. You will also have at the end of
the modeling process a well-defined description of the business process,
how the pieces fit together. And that can be of benefit its own right. Fourth one I've got here
isn't entirely obvious. But one of the things
a model can do is create what I call an institutional memory. So, many businesses will have some
smart person who is relied on for doing certain things,
certain forecasting activities. What do you think we're
going to sell next month? They're someone who's worked for
the company 25 years. You go to them,
they have a good sense of what's going on. But what happens if that person leaves? Knowledge goes with them. And so you can think of a model as
creating an institutional memory. Because that model is going to be a set of
equations, a set of inputs and outputs. And that's going to stick
around beyond any individual. And so I think models can be
useful from that point of view. Ultimately, the model is going to
be used as a decision support tool. And I've bolded the word
support here because it's a little naive to think that
the model is going to reveal truth. They're always approximations. And the model is typically going to
be used as one of a suite of tools to help support the decision
making within a company. And so it's very much not
an end in its own right but a support to other activities. My final comment here is that sometimes I think that models are serendipitous
insight generators. By going through the modeling process
you learn something that you hadn't thought about at all,
something very unexpected. And that happens quite often. And so that's another benefit of modeling.