Welcome to the fundamentals
of quantitative modeling. I'm going to start off by talking about
some of the goals of this course. One of the things that you're going to
get out of the course is exposure to the language of modeling. There are terms that people who fit
models that tend to throw around a lot. And you want to understand those terms
you want to have seen those terms used. By doing that you're going to just be
much more comfortable as a participant in a group of people who are going
through a quantitative modeling activity. I'm going to show you a variety of models
that are used in a business setting and how those models are applied in practice. So you're going to get exposure to
the sorts of models that people use. Of course, modeling is a huge, huge topic. There are so many models out there,
I can't show you everything but I'll show you some of the important ones. We're going to discuss
the process of modeling. Modeling tends not to be a linear
process in the sense that you start You need something in the middle,
and then you end. Modeling tends to be a much
more iterative process. As you build a model,
you look at its performance. You're perhaps not happy with the
performance, so you need to go back and revisit some of the assumptions of
the model, the formulation, etc. And so, we're going to go through
the modeling process as well. As you move on to create your own
models there's a big question that immediately occurs is
which model should I use. And to help us think
through that question, I'm going to talk about some of
the characteristics of the models. And you need to think about
the characteristics of the process you're trying to model, and map the characteristic of the business
into the characteristics of the model. So at the end of this module we're
going to talk about some characteristics, of some key mathematical functions
that are used in modeling. And as we talk about those key
characteristics, one needs to think about how they map to the characteristics
of the business process, that you're interested in. We going to talk about the value and the limitations of quantitative model,
as well. So what sorts of question are they
really good at answering and what sorts of things
would give you cause for concern in terms of
applying the model itself? So it's very important to understand
the limitations of models and one of the common misconceptions I believe is that many people think models
can do more than they can actually do. They seem to think that there are panacea
that they can answer all questions. And so, understanding their
limitations is very, very important. And ultimately this course is going to
provide a set of foundational material for
the other courses in the specialization. In terms of resources that are used in
the specialization and this course. There is software and in particular, Excel is used, Microsoft Excel, for
implementing some of the models. Along with its analog, Google sheets, so
those are implementation environments. In terms of graphics that are present
in the slides that I'm showing you, there's a language called R which
is an open source statistical, modeling platform and simulation
platform that is very, very helpful. And finally,
if you're a little rusty in your math. Or you just want to revisit some of
the mathematical ideas as you go along through the course, then there is
an E-book that you might find useful that really distills a set of mathematical
ideas down to the essentials. That one needs to do
quantitative business modeling. And so the idea there is that the language of quantitative modeling is
mathematics and statistics. And if you're not 100%
comfortable with those topics, if you're a little bit rusty, then here's
a resource that can help you get up to speed very quickly on
those mathematical ideas.