Now it's time to talk about some of
the words that people throw around when they do quantitative modelling and so being exposed to this vocabulary is
helpful because it will allow you to describe to other people more
accurately what you're doing and also when you hear about someone else's model,
you'll have a sense of what's going on. And so, I'm going to describe
some of these terms here. Okay, there's a spectrum out there and most models fit on the spectrum somewhere
between empirical and theoretical. So an example of a theoretical model
is an option pricing model and what I mean there is that by a theoretical
model, is that someone has laid down a set of assumptions, they have written
down some relationships and they really ask what are the logical consequences
of those assumptions and relationships. So there could be assumption
that markets are efficient, and then given that assumption,
there are certain logical consequences and those logical consequences could be used
for example, to come up with a model for pricing, a stock option and so
that's an example of a theoretical model. The other end of the spectrum is a model
that is purely based on data and that's when I've got a set of
observations and I'm asking myself, how can I approximate the underlying
process that generated those observations? And so I start with the data and
then I try to back out the model as opposed to the theoretical
one where I start with the theory and look at the consequences of that theory. So an example of a data driven model might
be a set of customers that I have I have, I figured out the profitability
of each of those customers and now I ask myself the question, what
are the essential characteristics that separate out the profitable
from unprofitable customers? That would be a useful thing to know,
but my starting point here is not some grand theory of how the world
works, my starting point is a spreadsheet full of data, the data being
the profitability of my customers. There's a set of attributes associated
with those customers, and I'm trying to figure out which of the attributes are
associated with profitable customers, so that would be an example of
a totally data driven model. So, that's essentially the spectrum
where most modellers fit, somewhere between empirical and
theoretical. You'll find that there are often
arguments between people because they lie at different
points on the spectrum. My own opinion here is that you
really want to be able to take a piece from both of these approaches. Additional terms that you will
hear thrown around by people who are making models
are deterministic and probabilistic. We're going to look at these two
types of models in other modules, but just to get started,
what do we mean by deterministic? Well, essentially given
a fixed set of inputs, the model's always going to give
the identical or same output. So here's an example,
you've got $1000, that's the input. You're going to invest at a 4% annual
compound interest for two years. After two years, given the way
the money is growing, that $1000 is always going to turn out to be equal to or
will have grown to $1081.60 and it's never going to change,
it's totally deterministic. The same input,
always gives the same output, but what happens if you took that $1,000 and
rather than putting it in to an investment that was growing at 4%,
you bought lottery tickets with it? And, I could say well how much is
this $1,000 going to have grown to after two years, for example,
after the lottery has happened. Well, the answer now is,
it fundamentally depends on whether or not one of those lottery
tickets won the lottery or not. If none of the tickets won the lottery, then you're going to get an output
of zero, all the money disappeared. If one of the lottery tickets was
lucky enough to win the lottery, you're going to get a very,
very different output. And so the output of this process or model is probabilistic,
it's what we call a random variable. It all depends on whether or
not the lottery was won. So that's very different from
the deterministic model. And, the term stochastic is often used
as really a synonym for a probabilistic model, so you'll see both of those
terms used when there's uncertainty. And so those are terms deterministic and
probabilistic. More terms. The next one is discrete
versus continuous. Now, the analogy that I'm going to
use here is the idea of a watch. Now, there are two different
sorts of watches, essentially. Some watches are digital, and
others are what we call analog. And so a digital watch only can show
you specific times because it has the given or finite number of numbers
appearing on the face and so, there's some inherent resolution beyond
which you can't go in telling the time. On the other hand,
if you have an analog watch, that's one where the hands
are physical and sweep out the time,
then it can pick up any time possible because the hands have to
go through every single number. That's the idea of something
that's continuous. So just as we have digital and analog, we're going to have in our modelling,
the same concept happening. In the modelling world,
we would call them discrete or continuous. So discrete processes are characterized
by jumps in distinct values just like the digital watch, the numbers
jump from one to another whereas continuous processes tend to be
much smoother and more formally, you can get an infinite number of
values happening in any fixed interval. And so going back to the watch here,
you will see every possible time presented on the analog watch between say,
12 o'clock and 1 o'clock, because the hands are going to sweep out
every single time within that period. And so, some models will be discrete and
others will be continuous and it's one of the choices that
the modeller gets to make. Now when you do spreadsheets, you're typically taking a rather
discrete approach to the world. When you think of mat
continuous variables, it tends to be a little more
mathematical in nature. Final terms that we want to talk
about are static and dynamic models. So, static models are those that are
really trying to capture a single snapshot of a business process and so
here's an example of a static model. Given a website's installed software base, what are the chances that
it is compromised today? I'm just trying to make a statement
about this single period in time. By contrast, a dynamic model is much
more about an evolution of a process and it's the evolution that is of interest
that we are trying to understand. And these dynamic models typically capture
a business process moving from state to state, and we model
the dynamics of those transitions. So here's an example, what I would
think of as a dynamic model and this would be a sort of question
that someone who was a public policy individual would be interested in,
or an economist. So given a person's participation in a job
training program, how long is it until he or she finds a job and then once they
find one, how long can they keep it? And so I'm thinking here that
a person's participation in the labor market goes through a set of states. Sometimes they're unemployed, and
sometimes they're employed, and they can go from employed back to
unemployed again, potentially. And so we'd be interested in modeling
the transition through these states, and that would be the idea of a dynamic
as opposed to a static model. So there's a whole set of
terminology that I've gone through that is associated with modelling. That's what I call the lexicon of models
and it's not like you can only have one of these things going on in terms of the
language, you could clearly have something like a static probabilistic,
discrete time model. And we're going to see one of those and
it's termed a mark of chain later on. So, there's our lexicon.