So summarizing what we've
done in this first module, we started off talking about uses for
models. The two key uses for
these quantitative models tend to be in predictive analytics,
in making predictions, and forecasts, and
also in doing optimization problems. We've seen the steps involved
in the modelling process. It starts off by defining some variables,
identifying the scope of the model. There's a formulation stage. But you must not forget that
there is an entire validation and sensitivity analysis phase as well. If your model works well, that's good. But typically it's not going to
work well the first time around. That's why I put a feedback
loop in the modeling process. So the model never in my
experience works perfectly straight out of the box
the first time around. We're very iterative, we go back and we revisit some of
the assumptions behind the model. We might look for
additional terms to put into the model. We might reformulate the model. There's an iterative process there. Ultimately, we feel that
the model validates well and we performed our sensitivity analysis. We then ask ourself the key question,
is the model fit for purpose? And I've used that language very purposely there because I have not
said, is the model right or is it wrong. Because models are never absolutely right
because they are almost by definition, simplifications of a much
more complicated real world. The key question is, is the model fit for purpose, is it useful at
helping me answer questions? In other words, is it going to be
a useful decision support tool. So don't forget to validate your model. We've discussed various types of models. That was the language that
I introduced in modeling. We talked about deterministic and
stochastic. We talked about discrete and continuous. We talked about static and dynamic models. So those terms are important to
understand because you might at some point have a conversation as you create
more of these models with someone and say, well did you create a discrete time or
continuous time model? And being able to understand
those words is very helpful if you want to be able to
participate in those conversations. The final part of the module
was reviewing some essential mathematics in particular seeing
the functions that we're going to be using as we create our quantitative models
there were four key functions. Linear, power, exponential, and log. And from a modeling point of view, what you want to understand about
these functions is how they relate changes in the input to changes
in the output and whether or not those changes are being thought of
in absolute terms or relative terms. So recall, a straight line is
characterized by its constant slope. And that tells us that absolute
changes in X are always accompanied with the same
absolute change in Y of M. That's what the slope of M equals. Whereas if we had a power function,
then we would have a 1% change in X is associated with
an approximate M% change in Y. So percent change in X
is percent change in Y. And you simply have to think about and
understand your business process and ask yourself, well, on which type of change
is this process most readily modeled? In terms of absolute change or
percent change. And by doing that, you're able to think which of these
functions should be used in the model.